gdbundle (#95)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/gdbundle.md

also where I got up-close and personal with GDB and had my first encounter with
GDB's Python API.

One one of our bi-weekly hack-days, one of the firmware engineers wrote a script
to pretty-print a summary of the heap for a device connected to GDB using its
Python API ([similar to
this]({% post_url 2019-07-02-automate-debugging-with-gdb-python-api %}#adding-a-custom-gdb-command-with-gdb-python)).
It was **awesome**. But, using this script with GDB wasn't without problems. We
slowly grew it into a collection of scripts and improved our workflows. A few
notable improvements were:

- Add more scripts for each of our critical modules in the firmware, such as
  state machines, Bluetooth state, etc.
- Instead of just printing the heap allocations, expose the heap through a
  Python Class. e.g.
  `heap = Heap(g_heap); total_size = sum([b.size] for b in heap.iter_blocks()])`.
- [Wrapping the GDB
  invocation]({% post_url 2019-08-27-building-a-cli-for-firmware-projects %})
  and loading GDB Python scripts automatically so every developer on the team
  had them loaded and ready to use at all times.

This was all back in 2015 or so. As I've moved around to other companies and

> talked to many other embedded software developers, I've discovered that many of

Reviewer: Maybe: go with something positive rather than something negative. Like:

"... moved to other companies, I've had the joy to spread the gospel of GDB scripting to other embedded software developers. It's amazing how much a few python scripts can improve one's day to day work".

them have never thought to extend or automate GDB using scripts, and even more

> had not even heard of GDB's Python API. I'm saddened by this.

Reviewer: Lost the "saddened by this", it risks being a bit patronizing to the audience.

I have a personal goal (and it's one of Memfault's missions) to empower embedded
software developers with the tools they need to get their job done, and I'm
excited to share with you something I've been thinking about and building
towards for over 3 years.

<!-- excerpt start -->

GDB desperately needs a better way for developers to share scripts,

> user-interface improvements, and utilities with the broader public. This would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user-interface improvements, and utilities with their peers. This would
```

enable building upon each other's work and debugging techniques, progressing the

> entire community and preventing developers from reinventing the wheel time and
> time again. GDB (and LLDB) needs a plugin manager, and I'd like to introduce to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
entire community and preventing developers from reinventing the wheel. GDB (and LLDB) needs a plugin manager, and I'd like to introduce to
```

Reinventing the wheel time and time again is a repetition, both parts of the sentence mostly mean the same thing :-)

you [gdbundle](https://github.com/memfault/gdbundle).

<!-- excerpt end -->

> This article speaks primarily to GDB, but gdbundle works perfectly
> with LLDB as well.

_Like Interrupt? [Subscribe](http://eepurl.com/gpRedv) to get our latest posts
straight to your mailbox_

{:.no_toc}

## Table of Contents

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
* auto-gen TOC:
{:toc}

> ## Why Does GDB Need a Plugin Manager

Reviewer: You can probably cut one of the sub section out

> What has happened in the GDB ecosystem due to not having a plugin manager?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anyone who has used a modern language will tell you: package managers are fantastic! The GDB ecosystem stands to gain much from adopting one.
```

Author: That's a much better sentence. A+

### No Out-Of-Box Debugging of Popular Software

> Within this past year, I've worked with four different microcontroller stacks, 7

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the past year, I've worked with four different microcontroller stacks, seven
```

different Real-Time Operating Systems (RTOS's), and a handful of common
low-level software libraries including Mbed TLS, the WICED Bluetooth Stack, and

> many mediocre vendor SDK's. Tens of thousands of developers use each one of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
many vendor SDK's. Tens of thousands of developers use each one of
```

these stacks/libraries, and every single one of them has to manually debug each
module by hand by using GDB's print functionality or write their own scripts.

> This is why embedded developers often choose to use thousand dollar or mediocre
> IDE debuggers over using GDB. They have these debugging utilities built in or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is why embedded developers often choose to use proprietary debuggers over, despite their cost and clunkiness. They have these debugging utilities built in or
```

allow extensions to be integrated and sold[^code_confidence], even though the
software backing them isn't all that complex.

> ### Poor Installation and Non-Discoverable of Extensions

Reviewer: I would significantly rework this sub point so it reads more like "something we're missing out on" rather than "other people do it so it must be good".

I'd go with this:
```
### Package Managers Build Community
```
and talk about how VSCode, and even PlatformIO have built a big community of people around the exchange & use of plugins.

In the age of modern developer tools, easy installation of extensions is a
critical facet that needs to be taken seriously. Let's take the new wave of text
editors as an example. The ones that have gained massive popularity over the
last 5 years, Sublime Text, VSCode, and Atom, all have a built-in package
manager which allows searching for and installing extensions with only a few
keystrokes. **This is what GDB should have**.

As for discoverability, I love websites like
[VimAwesome](https://vimawesome.com/) and the
[VSCode Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/vscode). I check them
regularly to see which pieces of my workflows have been automated for me.

If you believe this ease of extensibility is only for high-level applications
and desktop style software, check out
[PlatformIO's Libraries page](https://platformio.org/lib/search?query=) which
provides easy installation and discoverability of compiled C/C++ packages for
embedded systems and Arduino.

> ### Monolithic, Invasive Projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Plugin development requires rebuilding the world
```

ambitious projects, such as [hugsy/gef](https://github.com/hugsy/gef),
[pwndbg/pwndbg](https://github.com/pwndbg/pwndbg), and
[snare/voltron](https://github.com/snare/voltron), are required to rewrite or
copy-paste functionality that would normally be imported from popular Python
packages (e.g. termcolor). This is a barrier to entry for plugin developers.

On the other side of the pendulum, since packages can't be imported easily
through the Python ecosystem, users are required to run
[invasive](https://github.com/pwndbg/pwndbg/blob/dev/setup.sh)
[shell](https://github.com/snare/voltron/blob/master/install.sh) scripts that
use the system's package manager and install Python packages into the system's
Python installation.

Every developer should be using virtual environments and leaving their system
Python installation alone, and the Python environment within GDB is no
different.

### Lack of Customization

On one hand, some might see this as a nice feature of GDB. Once you get a GDB
shell, you know exactly how to accomplish what you want, assuming you know how
to use GDB to begin with. This is similar to how people think about Vi(m).

> However, Vim is infinitely better today due to its customization options, plugin

Reviewer: Again, you should more explicitly call out the value: GDB is a pro tool with many different use cases. Plugins make it much more flexible and allow it to better fit those use cases.

Then you can use Vim a an example of that (e.g. plugins for support of smaller / less popular languages).

managers, community, and ability to quickly change the initial historic settings
to modern and sane defaults.

In contrast, GDB and it's customization story has roughly remained the same for
the last 10 years for the majority of developers. I found it ironic that the
most popular GDB enhancement at my previous employer was
[vim-scripts/Conque-GDB](https://github.com/vim-scripts/Conque-GDB), a Vim
plugin which wraps GDB.

> ## Life with a GDB Plugin Manager

Reviewer: I would nuke this section, I think.

    def __init__(self):
        super(HelloPy, self).__init__('hello_py', gdb.COMMAND_USER)

    def invoke(self, _unicode_args, _from_tty):
        print("Hello World from .py")

HelloPy()
```

```
$ gdb --command hello.py
(gdb) hello_py
Hello World from .py
```

If you don't want to keep typing `--command ...` every time you launch GDB, or
trying to convince or remind your co-workers to do the same, I suggest [wrapping
the GBD invocation with a
CLI]({% post_url 2019-08-27-building-a-cli-for-firmware-projects %}).

### objfile-gdb.ext File

The next way that GDB allows you to auto-load extensions is by matching the
object name to a script. Let's run through an example of this as well. Let's
create a c file called `test.c`.

```c
// test.c

#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
  printf("%s\n", "Hello World");
}
```

Next, we'll compile it into a binary named `myexe.out`.

```
$ gcc -g test.c -o myexe.out
```

Now that we have an executable called `myexe.out`, we can create a script file
named `<object_file_name>-gdb.gdb`, or in our case `myexe.out-gdb.gdb`, and GDB
will load it for us automatically.

> NOTE: GDB will auto load scripts from the directories listed in the command

> > `show auto-load scripts-directory` or from thee current working directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> `show auto-load scripts-directory` or from the current working directory.
```

For this example, we'll copy our previous file.

```
$ cp hello.gdb myexe.out-gdb.gdb
```

> We can now launch GDB without nay extra arguments other than the executable and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now launch GDB without any extra arguments other than the executable and
```

verify that the command is loaded.

```
$ gdb myexe.out
(gdb) hello
Hello World from .gdb
```

> It also works with GDB Python scripts, however the filename must end with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also works with GDB Python scripts, however the filename must end with
```

`gdb_scripts.py`) or full scripts, like the `HelloPy` script we wrote above.

While I admit that this functionality is clever, it means that the information
is hard-coded in the ELF file and can't be easily changed at a later date.
Adding a filename or fixing a bug in an embedded script would require [creative
uses of GNU binutils]([Conda]({% post_url 2020-04-08-gnu-binutils %})) and some
work re-distributing the ELF files.

## `gdbundle` - GDB's Plugin Manager

gdbundle is short for GDB bundle and is a plugin manager for GDB.

To summarize, gdbundle plugins:

- can be automatically loaded by `gdbundle`.
- are Python 2 and 3 compatible.
- can be distributed through PyPi within Python packages.
- can be installed using `pip`, `poetry`, etc.
- can be installed into virtual environments to prevent version collisions.
- can wrap pre-existing GDB plugins/scripts, such as
  [cyrus-and/gdb-dashboard](https://github.com/cyrus-and/gdb-dashboard), so that
  modifying the original package is not necessary.

gdbundle tries to remain simple, un-opinionated, and delegates most of the work
of loading the plugin to the plugin itself. Let's go over how it works! It won't
take long.

> In order and by default, gdbundle:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, gdbundle:
```

## The Future

So, where does gdbundle go from here? Honestly, it's up to everyone reading this. I've been using this internally for a few weeks, and I have been battle testing the `sys.path` hi-jacking approach for 3 years (along with \~100 developers at my previous company). I am confident in the approach taken, but just like I said about GDB, a plugin manager is nothing without the community and willing developers to hack something together.

_All the code used in this blog post is available on
[Github](https://github.com/memfault/interrupt/tree/master/example/faster-compilation/).
See anything you'd like to change? Submit a pull request!_

{:.no_toc}

## Neat GDB Script Repositories

I came across some neat repositories of GDB scripts while I was searching the
Internet. I've included them below for anyone looking to learn more about how
people use GDB Python.

> Sponsored by [grep.app](https://grep.app). Not really, but that app is seriously incredible. 
> [Try it out for yourself!](https://grep.app/search?q=%28import%20gdb%7Cgdb.COMMAND_USER%29&regexp=true&filter[lang][0]=Python)

> ### Debugging Utilities

Reviewer: Would be nice to write a half sentence about what each of these is.

> virtual environment, Conda environment, `brew` Python installation, etc.
> Mismatched major versions will cause packages and plugins to either break in
> mysterious ways or not show up at all. More information can be found in the
> [gdbundle README.md](https://github.com/memfault/gdbundle)

## gdbundle Example Plugin

No plugin manager introduction would be complete without an example plugin. I've
created a "Hello World" plugin for gdbundle called
[`gdbundle-example`](https://github.com/memfault/gdbundle-example). Let's dig in
and see how it's built.

### Structure

Below is the directory structure of our example plugin that works with GDB and
LLDB.

```
├── README.md
├── gdbundle_example
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── gdb_loader.py
│   ├── lldb_loader.py
│   └── scripts
│       ├── example_gdb.gdb
│       ├── example_gdb.py
│       └── example_lldb.py
└── pyproject.toml
```

Simple, right? I've opted to use `pyproject.toml` instead of `setup.py` because
I wanted to embrace the future of standardized packaging, but note that these
packages will work with Python 2 and 3, so it shouldn't matter.

### How It Works

Let's look at the code in `gdbundle_example/gdb_loader.py`

```python

> import gdb

Author: Yeah, still need to go through the README today and update bits of it. Thanks for the poke

import os

PACKAGE_DIR = os.path.dirname(__file__)

SCRIPT_PATHS = [
    [PACKAGE_DIR, 'scripts', 'example_gdb.gdb'],
    [PACKAGE_DIR, 'scripts', 'example_gdb.py']
]

def _abs_path(path):
    return os.path.abspath(os.path.join(*path))

def gdbundle_load():
    for script_path in SCRIPT_PATHS:
        gdb.execute("source {}".format(_abs_path(script_path)))
```

> Notice the `gdbundle_load` function which `gdbundle` will call directly. When

Reviewer 2: I guess gdbundle could also call `get_scripts()` and do this itself? Did you opt not to do that so the script writer has more flexibility w.r.t what happens during load?

Author: I changed the way plugins loaded the code when I realized 2 things: 

- With PyCortexMDebug , it was easier for the package to be loaded by Python `import ...` instead of just sourcing files. 
- With the distinction between LLDB and GDB, it made it easier to delegate it to the plugins. 

I do eventually want to come up with both options so that a hollistic configuration story is better, but lets first see if things take off.

this is called, it takes each script file located in `scripts/` and tells GDB to
`source` it. Notice that both GDB Python and GDB Command scripts work!

By using `gdb.execute("source <script>")`, plugins can source GDB scripts that
were never designed with gdbundle in mind or designed to be distributed.

## A Few More Examples

Given the flexibility of gdbundle itself, it can allow developer to package up
any of the already existing GDB scripts and make installation easier for
everyone.

Here are a few more examples of plugins I've created that wrap popular packages
that I use frequently.

- [gdbundle-gdb-dashboard](https://github.com/memfault/gdbundle-gdb-dashboard) -
  gdbundle plugin for
  [cyrus-and/gdb-dashboard](https://github.com/cyrus-and/gdb-dashboard).

> - [gdbundle-PyCortexMDebug](https://github.com/memfault/gdbundle-PyCortexMDebug) -

Reviewer 2: I forget if this package still does the svd parse on import but that's something I would want to source conditionally if so hehe

Author: Haha, it doesn't do the svd parse on load since an svd file isn't given as an argument. But yeah, it takes forever!

  [bnahill/PyCortexMDebug](https://github.com/bnahill/PyCortexMDebug).
- [gdbundle-voltron](https://github.com/memfault/gdbundle-voltron) - gdbbundle
  plugin for [snare/voltron](https://github.com/snare/voltron). This example is
  my personal favorite because the install script is particularly sketchy but
  you can simply run `pip install gdbundle-voltron` and you're up and running!

## Summary of Benefits of using gdbundle

There are a handful of indisputable benefits of using gdbundle.

1. Just `pip install gdbundle-<plugin-name>`. No more manually editing your
   `~/.gdbinit` in specific ways depending on the extension.
2. It **enables** developers to use virtual environments (and encourages it!)
   without the need for each plugin to
   [mangle `sys.path`](https://github.com/snare/voltron/blob/master/voltron/entry.py#L26-L34)
   in creative ways and install native packages using `apt` or `brew`.
3. Personal projects and team projects can have project-specific
   `requirements.txt` and `.gdbinit` files. With these two in place, a new
   developer would just need to `pip install -r requirements.txt` and they'll
   have everything they need to start using the plugins.

> 4. Discoverability. Want to find out what new gdbundle packages exist? Just go

Reviewer 2: Will you publish a few of your examples here before publishing?

Author: Yes, I'll publish them today and patch up the readme's and repo links.
